## Introduction



- Proteomic data is special
    - Captures post-translational events
    - Close to mechanism of action for many therapies
    - CPTAC: [@DOI:10.1016/j.xcrm.2020.100004; @DOI:10.1016/j.cell.2019.10.007] 



Proteomic data provides measurements that are uniquely close to the mechanism of action for many cancer therapies. As such, it can provide an unmatched perspective into the mechanism of drug action and resistance. At the same time, extracting the source of patient-to-patient differences in proteomic measurements and understanding its relevance for drug sensitivity is extremely challenging. Correlative analyses are most common but are difficult to mechanistically interpret.




Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) models are mechanistic models that are uniquely powerful for identifying the drivers of differences within measurements, integrating our prior knowledge, and interpreting data. However, a key question that limits their use for patient data is how to handle patient-to-patient differences. Constructing multiple patient-specific models is infeasible due to the limited data for each patient. Alternatively, universal models that use patient invariant and patient specific parameters to integrate data across multiple individuals have been proposed [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2018.10.013]. However, how to estimate these patient specific parameters is challenging as genetic and microenvironmental context influences signaling pathways in complex, non-linear and often poorly understood ways.


At its core, the challenge of integrating mechanistic models with patient-derived measurements is an issue of how to account for patient-to-patient variation. Mechanistic dynamical models have been widely applied to data of all types, but are used where the sources of variation among measurements can be explicitly identified and modeled. By contrast, variation among individuals can arise through both factors that can easily be identified, like changes in the abundance of the species being modeling, and endless other molecular and physiological factors that cannot be usefully enumerated in a mechanistic approach. Still, the structure of mechanistic models provides important constraints on the behavior of molecular pathways and interpretability that is missing from purely data-driven statistical methods.

Here, we propose the integration of autoencoders with mechanistic models to leverage both of their strengths. Specifically, this allows for training and predictions by a mechanistic model using patient-derived samples, with the autoencoder component accounting for patient-to-patient differences. We show that this allows for mechanistic interpretation of these data; more robust latent space representations of patient relationships; and integration of prior knowledge, other data sources such as *in vitro* experiments or other data types, and clinical measurements. Mechanistic autoencoders therefore offer a general solution to building mechanistic models from clinical samples.



FROM PROPOSAL

Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) models are mechanistic models that are uniquely powerful for identifying the drivers of differences within measurements, integrating our prior knowledge, and interpreting data. However, a key question that limits their use for patient data is how to handle patient-to-patient differences. Constructing multiple patient-specific models is infeasible due to the limited data for each patient. Alternatively, universal models that use patient invariant and patient specific parameters to integrate data across multiple individuals have been proposed [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2018.10.013]. However, how to estimate these patient specific parameters is challenging as genetic and microenvironmental context influences signaling pathways in complex, non-linear and often poorly understood ways.
To address this issue, we propose a model structure that is based on a variational autoencoder. Autoencoders are neural networks that embed data into low dimensional latent feature space by passing the data though encoding and decoding layers. The extracted latent features can then be used to, e.g., assess patient-patient similarity through clustering. Here we propose to (partly) replace the decoder layers in the network by a coarse grained mechanistic model, where the encoded, latent representation of the data defines or influences the patient specific parameters of the universal ODE model. We propose to apply this to AML patient samples, where proteomic and phosphoproteomic measurements with high tumor purity can be collected. Moreover cells from biopsies can be cultured ex-vivo for up to 72h permitting the collection of additional and validation perturbation measurements from patient material.

This project is transformative as it permits the creation of relatively simple, mechanistic models that provide causal and intuitive explanations of phosphorylation patterns observed in perturbed and unperturbed (phospho)proteomic data. Using a formulation where peptide data serves as both input and output of the combined model, akin to an autoencoder, means that unperturbed patient samples can be regarded as perturbations to the reconstructed shared model, making the approach particularly suited to the application of patient samples, where only sparse set of perturbation data is available. 
The proposed approach is a novel combination of data-driven and mechanistic modeling, where the two approaches mutually benefit from each other. By mapping proteomic data to patient specific parameters in the universal model, the data-driven enables the integration of omics level data and absolves the mechanistic model from the need to mechanistically account for the complex, potentially poorly understood patient-specific differences. Compared to the few existing applications of ODE models to omics-level data, this would massively extend the amount of proteomic data that can be integrated. Moreover, we anticipate that the approach will permit the use of smaller, coarse grained models, which reduces the high computational burden that was so far limiting in other applications. Complimentarily, the mechanistic model also informs the data-driven embedding, as it forces the encoder to construct features that can explain differences in signal transduction and are thus reflective of our pathway knowledge. Finally, the generative property of the model means that we can identify individual outlier patients or species within the model (with low probability) which can direct further investigation and model refinement.
